Throughout history, a skillful use of rhetoric has been implemented for good and evil in inspiring and persuading a crowd. Many strategists would agree that you should never show the enemy your greatest weapon, in order to take them by surprise and secure a chance of victory. In the play Julius Caesar, the humble Mark Antony displays an unexpected power of oration through his ability to manipulate a crowd of Roman citizens, by expert rhetoric and a veil of deception, against a man who had finished his own opposing eulogy only minutes before. As a loyal friend to Caesar, the only solution for revenge is to destroy the corrupt senators. His mighty words and hypnotizing techniques are able to reverse the mindsets of the fickle plebeians after their opinion had just been formed by Brutus, a righteous man. Proceeding Antony’s rousing homily, Rome erupts into bedlam, enraged by the tragic, untimely death of their benevolent Emperor. His landslide success can be attributed to the use of pausing, weeping, flaunting, taunting, inciting, and conning.
Throughout his speech, Mark Antony pauses for several different reasons. One main cause is to allow his words to sink into the minds of the crowd. Before he is able to move on to his next point, each individual’s psyche must be shaped precisely to except his words. In line 106, Antony states, “My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar, and I must pause till it come back to Me.” Antony had just refuted Brutus’ claim of Caesar’s being an ambitious man, arguing that Caesar brought much wealth into Rome (89), wept for the poor (91), and refused a crown not once but three times (97). He rebukes the crowd for withholding their sorrow for a man who unveiled such greatness onto them, and pauses to allow them to ponder his arguments and their failures. This subtle form of manipulation is how Antony can so easily change their thoughts and opinions about someone they thought they had already known. 
Antony again is able to perform his mastery over an audience with a deceitful technique that prepares them for what is yet to come. He weeps in front of the crowd in order to express his lament and to make him seem more human, a man whom they can connect with. The act of crying may be viewed as a sign of weakness or vulnerability, but in this context, it only provides Antony with strength. By lowering himself down to a level even below the plebeians, he no longer seems like an overbearing authority figure but a fellow citizen who only wishes to gain sympathy for the death of a friend. This technique ultimately succeeds, as one man is heard to say, “Poor soul! His eyes are red as fire with weeping.” (115). “Poor soul.” Would Brutus have ever given a speech that would result in a remark like this from his own audience? No, because at all costs he must work to retain his honorable status of a “true” Roman. A versed ability to connect with the people is a major building block in both Antony’s success, and the downfall of Brutus.
The conspirators made many mistakes in dealing with the fate of Mark Antony, and one of the most foolish may have been the easiest to prevent. Antony possesses both the body of Caesar, and his will, which can be easily used to his advantage. He taunts the crowd by refusing to read to them the will, which drives them to eventually beg him to share. When the evidence of Caesar’s generosity and selflessness- “To every man, seventy five drachmas” (243) is revealed, the crowd is infuriated with the conspirators. They seek revenge. (244) Antony also flaunts the stab wounds of Caesar in order to provoke disgust and hatred toward the evident “murderers”. Brutus had persuaded the crowd that Caesar died a noble death, however, Antony uses the wounds to show that this savage murder was but the opposite. The crowd can no longer sympathize with the conspirators, forcing them to adhere to the words of Antony.
Now that the audience has been triggered, their hatred must be fueled. Antony incites the crowd again and again throughout his speech, driving them to anarchy by digging deep into their minds and manipulating their thoughts. The main situation in which Antony is able to mold the citizens is the discussion of Caesar’s will. First, Antony only mentions the will, but states that he probably should not read it because he is taking up the time of the conspirators. “I fear I wrong the honorable men whose daggers have stabbed Caesar.” (151) The citizens respond by calling the conspirators traitors, and making sarcastic remarks on the use of the word “honorable” to describe them. (153)  Antony now has the city in the palm of his hand. Finally, he reads to them the will of Caesar, which does not subdue their rage. Instead, the new information nourishes it. Caesar’s generosity (243,248) makes the people realize how unjust it was of the conspirators to strip them of such a great leader. Their hate translates into the destruction and chaos that now engulfs Rome.
Mark Antony was a friend of Caesar, and so to get revenge on the conspirators for his untimely death, he must persuade the crowd into glorifying him and destroying the faction. Brutus, an honorable man, speaks only in common prose, to lower himself to the level of the crowd. This technique may not have been powerful enough, but it was his true self. However, Antony must lie in order to get the greatest reaction from the citizens. In order to con the people, he dramatizes and overacts everything he says. It is in this technique where the changes that have overcome Mark Antony’s personality become evident. In Act 3, Scene 1, Line 175, shortly after the conspirators had killed Caesar, Antony pleads for them to kill him too, saying, “Now whilst your purple hands do reek and smoke, fulfill your pleasure. Live a thousand years, I shall not find myself so apt to die.” Antony acts pathetic and cowardly in order to hide his true intentions of overthrowing and defeating the conspirators. He risks death to remove suspicion, which displays the dedication and courage he has to avenge Caesar. Then, in Act 5, Scene 1, Line 31, Antony’s true colors finally come out. He insults Brutus harshly, using words to convey his unabashed hatred. “In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words. Witness the hole you made in Caesar’s heart, crying ‘Long live, hail, Caesar!’” Antony is a true master of falsehood, seen within his mannerisms and the points he makes during the speech. Even if certain cases he makes are truthful, his intention within the speech is definitely not. What is meant to be a eulogy, turns into a powerful rant against the conspirators, rising Caesar up to a new level of greatness in the minds of the Romans. This play exhibits the power of words, and how Antony was able to utilize them with prowess and style to manipulate a crowd for revenge. 
